28. Woe to the crown of pride, to the drunkards of Ephraim, whose glorious beauty is a fading
flower, which are on the head of the fat valleys of them that are overcome with wine. Behold,
the Lord hath a mighty and strong one, which as a tempest of hail and a destroying storm,
as a flood of mighty waters overflowing, shall cast down to the earth with the hand. The crown
of pride, the drunkards of Ephraim, shall be trodden under feet, and the glorious beauty which is on
the head of the fat valley shall be a fading flower, and as the hasty fruit before the summer,
which when he that looketh upon it seeth, while it is yet in his hand, he eateth it up. In that
day shall the Lord of hosts be for a crown of glory, and for a diadem of beauty unto the residue
of his people, and for a spirit of judgment to him that sitteth in judgment, and for strength
to them that turn the battle to the gate. But they also have erred through wine, and through
strong drink are out of the way. The priest and the prophet have erred through strong drink,
they are swallowed up of wine, they are out of the way through strong drink, they err in vision,
they stumble in judgment. For all the tables are full of vomit and filthiness, so that there is
no place clean. Whom shall he teach knowledge, and whom shall he make to understand doctrine?
Them that are weaned from the milk and drawn from the breasts. For precept must be upon precept,
precept upon precept, line upon line, line upon line, here a little and there a little. For with
stammering lips and another tongue will he speak to this people. To whom he said, This is the rest
wherewith ye may cause the weary to rest, and this is the refreshing. Yet they would not hear. But the
word of the Lord was unto them, precept upon precept, precept upon precept, line upon line,
line upon line, here a little and there a little, that they might go and fall backward, and be broken
and snared and taken. Wherefore hear the word of the Lord, ye scornful men, that rule this people
which is in Jerusalem. Because ye have said, We have made a covenant with death, and with hell
we are at agreement. When the overflowing scourge shall pass through, it shall not come unto us.
For we have made lies our refuge, and under falsehood we have hid ourselves. Therefore thus saith the
Lord God, Behold, I lay in Zion for a foundation, a stone, a tried stone, a precious cornerstone,
a sure foundation. He that believeth shall not make haste. Judgment also will I lay to the line,
and righteousness to the plummet. And the hail shall sweep away the refuge of lies, and the
waters shall overflow the hiding place. And your covenant with death shall be disannulled,
and your agreement with hell shall not stand. When the overflowing scourge shall pass through,
then ye shall be trodden down by it. From the time that it goeth forth, it shall take you. For
morning by morning shall it pass over, by day and by night. And it shall be a vexation only to
understand the report. For the bed is shorter than that a man can stretch himself on it,
and the covering narrower than that he can wrap himself in it. For the Lord shall rise up,
as in Mount Perazim. He shall be wroth as in the valley of Gibeon, that he may do his work,
his strange work, and bring to pass his act, his strange act. Now therefore be ye not mockers,
lest your bands be made strong. For I have heard from the Lord God of hosts a consumption,
even determined upon the whole earth. Give ye ear, and hear my voice. Harken, and hear my speech.
Doth the ploughman plough all day to sow? Doth he open and break the clods of his ground? When he
hath made plain the face thereof, doth he not cast abroad the fitches, and scatter the cumin,
and cast in the principal wheat, and in the appointed barley, and the rye in their place?
For his God doth instruct him to discretion, and doth teach him. For the fitches are not threshed
with a threshing instrument, neither is the cart wheel turned about upon the common. But the
fitches are beaten out with a staff, and the common with a rod. Breadcorn is bruised, because
he will not ever be threshing it, nor break it with the wheel of his cart, nor bruise it with
his horsemen. This also cometh forth from the Lord of hosts, which is wonderful in counsel,
and excellent in working. Isaiah chapter 29.
Woe to Ariel, to Ariel the city where David dwelt! Add ye year to year, let them kill sacrifices.
Yet I will distress Ariel, and there shall be heaviness and sorrow, and it shall be unto me as
Ariel. And I will camp against thee round about, and will lay siege against thee with a mount,
and I will raise forts against thee. And thou shalt be brought down, and thou shalt speak out
the ground, and thy speech shall be low out of the dust, and thy voice shall be as of one that
hath a familiar spirit out of the ground, and thy speech shall whisper out of the dust.
Moreover, the multitude of thy strangers shall be like small dust, and the multitude of the
terrible ones shall be as chuff that passeth away. Yea, it shall be at an instant suddenly.
Thou shalt be visited of the Lord of hosts with thunder, and with earthquake, and great noise,
with storm and tempest, and the flame of devouring fire. And the multitude of all the nations that
fight against Ariel, even all that fight against her and her munition, and that distress her,
shall be as a dream of a night vision. It shall even be as when a hungry man dreameth, and behold
he eateth, but he awakeeth, and his soul is empty. Or as when a thirsty man dreameth, and behold he
drinketh, but he awakeeth, and behold he is faint, and his soul hath appetite. So shall the multitude
of all the nations be that fight against Mount Zion. Stay yourselves and wonder. Cry ye out,
and cry, They are drunken, but not with wine. They stagger, but not with strong drink. For the Lord
hath poured out upon you the spirit of deep sleep, and hath closed your eyes. The prophets and your
rulers, the seers, hath he covered. And the vision of all is become unto you as the words of a book
that is sealed, which men deliver to one that is learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee. And he
saith, I cannot, for it is sealed. And the book is delivered to him that is not learned, saying,
Read this, I pray thee. And he saith, I am not learned. For as much as this people draw near me
with their mouth, and with their lips do honour me, but have removed their heart far from me,
and their fear toward me is taught by the precept of men. Therefore, behold, I will proceed to do a
marvellous work among this people, even a marvellous work and a wonder. For the wisdom of their wise
men shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid. Woe unto them that seek
deep to hide their counsel from the Lord, and their works are in the dark, and they say, Who
seeth us, and who knoweth us? Surely your turning of things upside down shall be esteemed as the
potter's clay. For shall the work say of him that made it, He made me not? Or shall the thing framed
say of him that framed it, He had no understanding. Is it not yet a very little while, and Lebanon shall
be turned into a fruitful field, and the fruitful field shall be esteemed as a forest? And in that
shall see out of obscurity and out of darkness. The meek also shall increase their joy in the Lord,
and the poor among men shall rejoice in the Holy One of Israel. For the terrible one is brought
to nought, and the scorner is consumed, and all that watch for iniquity are cut off. That make a
man an offender for a word, and lay a snare for him that reproveeth in the gate, and turn aside
the just for a thing of nought. Therefore thus saith the Lord who redeemed Abraham concerning the
Jacob. Jacob shall not now be ashamed, neither shall his face now wax pale. But when he seeth
his children, the work of mine hands in the midst of him, they shall sanctify my name, and sanctify
the Holy One of Jacob, and shall fear the God of Israel. They also that erred in spirit shall come
to understanding, and they that murmured shall learn doctrine. Isaiah chapter 30. Woe to the
rebellious children, saith the Lord, that take counsel but not of me, and that cover with the
covering, but not of my spirit, that they may add sin to sin, that walk to go down into Egypt,
and have not asked at my mouth, to strengthen themselves in the strength of Pharaoh, and to
trust in the shadow of Egypt. Therefore shall the strength of Pharaoh be your shame, and the trust
in the shadow of Egypt your confusion. For his princes were at Zohan, and his ambassadors came
to Hainis. They were all ashamed for people that could not profit them, nor be in help nor profit,
but a shame, and also a reproach. The burden of the beasts of the south, into the land of trouble
and anguish, from whence came the young and old lion, the viper and fiery flying serpent. They will
carry their riches upon the shoulders of young asses, and their treasures upon the bunches of
camels, to a people that shall not profit them. For the Egyptians shall help in vain, and to no
purpose. Therefore have I cried concerning this. Their strength is to sit still. Now go, write it
for them in a table, and note it in a book, that it may be for the time to come forever and ever,
that this is a rebellious people, lying children, children that will not hear the law of the Lord,
which say to the seers, see not, and to the prophets, prophesy not unto us right things,
speak unto us smooth things, prophesy deceits, get you out of the way, turn aside out of the path,
cause the Holy One of Israel to cease from before us. Wherefore thus saith the Holy One of Israel,
because you despise this word, and trust in oppression and perverseness, and stay thereon,
therefore this iniquity shall be to you as a breach ready to fall, swelling out in a high wall,
whose breaking cometh suddenly at an instant. And he shall break it as the breaking of the potter's
vessel that is broken in pieces. He shall not spare, so that there shall not be found in the
bursting of it a shard to take fire from the hearth, or to take water withal out of the pit.
For thus saith the Lord God, the Holy One of Israel, in returning and rest shall you be saved.
In quietness and in confidence shall be your strength, and ye would not. But ye said,
No, for we will flee upon horses, therefore shall ye flee. And we will ride upon the swift,
therefore shall they that pursue you be swift. One thousand shall flee at the rebuke of one,
at the rebuke of five shall ye flee, till ye be left as a beacon upon the top of a mountain,
and as an ensign on a hill. And therefore will the Lord wait, that he may be gracious unto you,
and therefore will he be exalted, that he may have mercy upon you. For the Lord is a God of judgment,
blessed are all they that wait for him. For the people shall dwell in Zion at Jerusalem,
thou shalt weep no more, he will be very gracious unto thee at the voice of thy cry.
When he shall hear it, he will answer thee. And though the Lord give you the bread of adversity
and the water of affliction, yet shall not thy textures be removed into a corner any more,
but thine eyes shall see thy textures, and thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying,
This is the way, walk ye in it, when ye turn to the right hand and when ye turn to the left.
Ye shall defile also the covering of thy graven images of silver, and the ornament of thy molten
images of gold. Thou shalt cast them away as a menstrous cloth, thou shalt say unto it,
Get thee hence. Then shall he give the rain of thy seed, that thou shalt sow the ground withal,
and bread of the increase of the earth, and it shall be fat and plenteous. In that day shall
thy cattle feed in large pastures. The oxen likewise and the young asses that ear the ground
shall eat clean provender, which hath been winnowed with the shovel and with the fan.
And there shall be upon every high mountain and upon every high hill rivers and streams of water
in the day of the great slaughter when the towers fall. Moreover the light of the moon shall be as
the light of the sun, and the light of the sun shall be sevenfold as the light of seven days,
in the day that the Lord bindeth up the breach of his people and healeth the stroke of their wound.
Behold the name of the Lord cometh from far burning with his anger, and the burden thereof
is heavy. His lips are full of indignation and his tongue as a devouring fire, and his breath as an
overflowing stream shall reach to the midst of the neck to sift the nations with the sieve of
vanity, and there shall be a bridle in the jaws of the people causing them to err. Ye shall have a
song as in the night when a holy solemnity is kept, and gladness of heart as when one goeth with a
pipe to come into the mountain of the Lord to the mighty one of Israel. And the Lord shall cause his
glorious voice to be heard, and shall show the lighting down of his arm with the indignation of
his anger, and with the flame of a devouring fire with scattering and tempest and hailstones.
For through the voice of the Lord shall the Assyrian be beaten down which smote with a rod,
and in every place where the grounded staff shall pass which the Lord shall lay upon him,
it shall be with tablets and harps, and in battles of shaking will he fight with it.
For Tophet is ordained of old, yea, for the king it is prepared, he hath made it deep and large,
the pile thereof is fire and much wood. The breath of the Lord, like a stream of brimstone, doth
kindle it. End of chapters 28 to 30